SPEECH
Banking regulators, supervisors and their
watchers
Keynote speech by Claudia Buch, Chair of the Supervisory Board of
the ECB, at the Watching European Financial Market Regulation and
Supervision Conference, Goethe University Frankfurt
Frankfurt am Main, 15 September 2026
We all know about birdwatchers, and many of us know about central bank watchers. But how many of
us know about watchers of regulation and supervision? Probably not many. This may seem surprising:
savers, firms and taxpayers – they all care about sound banks.[ ]
So what is “watching regulation and supervision”, the theme of this conference, all about?
Ultimately, we are talking about accountability. As supervisors, we exercise public powers and carry
out our tasks independently. Our independence requires accountability and transparency: the public
must be able to assess how we use the responsibility we are given. Banks are the first to feel the
effects of supervisory decisions. That’s why our decisions are open to administrative and judicial
review.
But the effects of supervision and regulation on society are much broader, and the transmission
channels are seldom straight.
How would banks have performed in the absence of supervisory measures? Is financial stability the
result of good policy or good luck? How does the macroeconomic environment affect the performance
of banks? What are the effects – and the potential unintended side effects – of regulation and
supervision?
Answering these questions requires detailed data, good analytical frameworks and time. This partly
explains why our watchers are a relatively rare species.
But we should not be content with the current state of play. We need to further develop the community
of watchers.
Let me focus on three areas where progress can be made.
First, evaluations of regulation and supervision need to be comprehensive – assessing the direct
effects on banks, but also the broader effects on the policy objectives that society cares about. The
European Commission has recently published a report on the competitiveness of the European
banking sector. The ensuing legislative process provides an opportunity to adopt that holistic
perspective – looking at the implications of the prudential framework for growth, integration, financial
stability and resilience. This is particularly important in the current environment characterised by
heightened geopolitical risks and rapid structural changes in the financial system.[ ] Within our
1
2
mandate to ensure the safety and soundness of banks, we are fully committed to contributing to such
evaluations.
Second, we need a broad community of watchers. Policymakers, banks, the public, academics,
analysts, journalists – they all have a legitimate interest in our work. Here, I see room for improvement.
Often, banks are the most vocal in public debates. But we need a broader debate representing the
depositors who entrust their savings to banks, the firms that are financed by banks and society at large
which benefits from a functioning banking system but also bears the cost of crises. Academics have a
special role and responsibility – they have the analytical tools to shed light on the complex functioning
of the banking system and its welfare effects.
Third, we need to further develop the infrastructure that supports an informed debate. This
infrastructure includes frameworks for policy evaluations, repositories of relevant studies, information
platforms and data centres. It is essential to our accountability; it can promote independent evaluations
of regulation and supervision. In the age of artificial intelligence (AI), we must harness advancements
in terms of computing power and analytical capabilities to advance welfare.
The case for comprehensive evaluations of prudential regulation
and supervision
There is a long tradition of watching central banks and monetary policy decisions among the media,
academics and market analysts. Back in 1999, Ottmar Issing gave a speech entitled “The ECB and its
watchers”.[ ] This marked the beginning of a series of conferences bringing together monetary
policymakers and analysts.
While there is no direct equivalent to “ECB watchers” in the field of banking regulation and supervision,
this conference can serve as a catalyst for change.
Monetary policy and supervisory decisions differ in terms of their objectives, instruments and
communication channels. But these differences make assessing the effects – and potential side
effects – of regulation and supervision no less important.[ ]
The supervisory policy cycle
As in monetary policy, a structured “policy cycle” – starting from the policy objective, the definition of
intermediate targets and the choice of policy measures – can support policy evaluations. Let me give
you an example – the setting of capital requirements.
The first step in the policy cycle is a clear objective. The objective of supervision is well defined in
European legislation – to ensure the safety and soundness of banks, thereby contributing to financial
stability.[ ]
The second step is identifying priorities and indicators that make progress towards that objective
measurable. The safety and soundness of banks is shaped by sound capital, liquidity and governance
and sustainable business models. These are the indicators we assess in our Supervisory Review and
Evaluation Process (SREP) – some of them are quantifiable, some are more qualitative in nature.
Let me focus on capital as one example of how the policy cycle works in practice.
3
4
5
Bank capital is key. In essence, capital is a source of funding for banks. Unlike debt, it has the ability to
absorb losses. It enables, rather than discourages, banks to lend and take risks. Regulatory
requirements ensure that banks’ capital levels are commensurate with society’s risk preferences. In a
crisis, risks should not be shifted away from bank managers and owners onto depositors or taxpayers.
In short: capital aligns incentives between banks and society.[ ]
Bank capital is also a valuable indicator as it can be tracked over time and across institutions. As
recent ECB work shows, capital requirements increased after the global financial crisis, when
resilience needed to be built.[ ] They have stabilised in recent years, with a shift from microprudential
requirements to macroprudential buffers that can be released in times of stress.
This clear progress in terms of resilience is no coincidence. It is the result of improved regulation and
the supervisory measures we take to ensure that a bank’s capital is adequate to cover the risks it
takes – the third step in the policy cycle.
We set capital requirements based on a clear methodology. According to the Basel framework, Pillar 1
capital requirements are minimum requirements that address credit, operational and market risk.[ ]
Pillar 2 capital requirements cover bank-specific risks that are not, or not sufficiently, covered by these
minimum requirements.
This year, we are using a new, revised methodology for setting Pillar 2 capital requirements. This
methodology is more risk-based, while leaving room for supervisory judgement and ensuring that there
are no overlaps between Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 requirements.[ ]
Benchmarking is part of our methodological toolkit. Before informing banks of capital-related decisions,
we ensure consistency across banks. A structured benchmarking process, conducted by an
independent second-line function, identifies potential outliers and ensures that methodologies are
used in a consistent way, while preserving judgement grounded in bank-specific risk profiles.[ ]
Evaluations and impact assessments
As a fourth step in our supervisory cycle, the effects of supervision can be evaluated ex post – at bank
or aggregate level.
As regards the bank-level perspective, our analysis shows, for example, that supervisory judgement
adds relevant information that automatic indicators cannot capture, while ensuring that supervisory
discretion remains anchored in common methodologies.[ ]
But public interest in the effects of supervision is much wider, including the aggregate effects of overall
capital requirements and resilience on macroeconomic outcomes. The European Commission’s report,
for example, focuses on integration, innovation, growth and bank competitiveness. In the public
discourse, distributional questions play an important role as well.
Generally, assessing the impact of supervision and regulation must isolate the effects of other factors.
Macroeconomic conditions, market developments and management decisions affect outcomes. This
requires sound evaluation frameworks and analytical rigour, a point to which I will return later.
6
7
8
9
10
11
Evaluations also need to consider the different layers of the capital stack. In addition to
microprudential capital requirements, we set Pillar 2 guidance to ensure banks can absorb potential
losses resulting from adverse macroeconomic scenarios. Unlike the legally binding Pillar 2
requirement, Pillar 2 guidance is a non-binding supervisory expectation based on banks’ resilience
under adverse scenarios. As an integral part of the framework, the Single Resolution Board defines
gone-concern capital requirements to ensure that the costs of bank distress don’t fall on taxpayers.
National competent authorities set macroprudential requirements to safeguard financial stability.
All these requirements serve a purpose, but they also make the system rather complex.
Last year, the ECB Governing Council’s High-Level Task Force thus tabled proposals on how the
capital stack can be simplified by combining macroprudential buffers into “releasable” and “non-
releasable” types.[ ] Moreover, different requirements should be applied consistently across Europe.
Consistency and coordination is, in my view, what a “holistic” view of capital is all about – not the
weakening or widening of policy mandates, or the setting of quantitative caps.
In sum, we need a societal debate about the broader effects of regulation and supervision, building on
the best evidence and independent analyses.
As supervisors, we are strongly committed to contributing to these broader debates through our
accountability channels, building a community of watchers and further developing the infrastructure for
policy evaluation.
Building a community of watchers
Supervisors have a clear mandate to keep banks sound and safe. Within this mandate, they act as
“delegated monitors” on behalf of depositors.[ ] Independence protects supervision from external
influences. But this raises an important governance question: who monitors the monitor?
The key is accountability. It requires us to explain and justify how we exercise our powers – through
several channels.
Generally, bank-specific supervisory decisions are subject to administrative and judicial review.[ ]
As supervisors, we are explicitly accountable to the European Parliament, which represents European
citizens, as well as the Council of the European Union. We have regular exchanges of views with the
relevant parliamentary committee and the Eurogroup, and we engage directly with national
parliaments.
In addition, European banking supervision is subject to external scrutiny through the Commission’s
periodic review of the SSM Regulation and through audits by the European Court of Auditors.[ ] And
our work is regularly assessed under the International Monetary Fund’s Financial Sector Assessment
Program.[ ]
Accountability requires transparency. Our Annual Report is the central vehicle for communicating how
we carry out our supervisory tasks. The next report will provide information on the comprehensive
reform of European supervision currently under way, with a view to becoming more efficient, effective
12
13
14
15
16
and risk-based.[ ] Over the years, we have significantly enhanced our transparency through
publications of methodologies, regular newsletters and blogs.
But a broad public debate about the effects of regulation and supervision goes beyond formal
accountability arrangements. To effectively discuss and challenge our actions, this debate needs to
reflect the views and perspectives of all stakeholders.
The Commission’s consultation on the competitiveness of the European banking sector is a case in
point. It received 227 responses.[ ] Business associations accounted for 43% of the responses,
individual banks for 16% and private-sector firms for 8%. Together, private-sector respondents made
up around two-thirds of all responses. By comparison, public authorities accounted for 14% of
responses, while academia, trade unions, NGOs and individual citizens together made up 19%.
These contributions focus on different aspects.[ ] At the risk of over-simplifying, there are two trends:
banks tend to focus on aspects that have a direct impact on them and highlight the cost of capital
requirements. NGOs and academics tend to emphasise the role played by the banking sector in
achieving broader societal objectives, such as reducing climate-related risks, and they stress the
importance of sufficient capital to support financial stability.
Each stakeholder offers a different and valuable perspective. But the uneven contribution of the
various stakeholders shows the need to better balance the debate. The views of the public, savers and
taxpayers are just as important as those of the industry. That’s why ECB Banking Supervision has
stepped up its outreach to civil society across the banking union in the last few years. The
Commission has several established outreach channels, such as the Financial Services User Group,
representing consumers, retail investors and micro-enterprises.
Given that we are here at Goethe University, let me focus on what can be done to involve the
academic community more.
More than 25 years ago, Ottmar Issing argued: “Although this may sound strange, we need to hear
views even more when there is disagreement because this is when we learn. When views are not
supportive of the ECB’s position but are well founded in good theory and obtain robust corroboration
from the data, then again I think the ECB can only gain from a dialogue with academia.”[ ]
In this spirit, academics can bring analytical frameworks, rigour and independent assessments to the
debate. They can focus on aspects which may otherwise receive insufficient attention.
Generally, our aim should be to build a stronger community of watchers, enhance the existing
accountability channels and ensure that the debate is grounded in the best evidence. This requires
further work to build a sound infrastructure.
Further developing the infrastructure for policy evaluation
To engage in birdwatching, you need good binoculars – and a lot of patience. Regulation and
supervision-watching requires more than that: evaluation frameworks, repositories, access to data and
information. This infrastructure has improved in recent years, but more in terms of investment and
commitment is needed.[ ]
17
18
19
20
21
Frameworks for policy evaluation
Higher capital requirements are good for resilience – but could they come at a cost in terms of weaker
growth or reduced lending? Improved regulations have made banks safer – but have risks shifted to
other parts of the financial system so that, overall, the system is not necessarily more stable? Has
European regulation had a negative impact on banks’ ability to successfully compete internationally?
In short: what have been the consequences – both intended and unintended – of improved regulation
and supervision?
These questions are at the core of current policy debates, but the answers are not straightforward.
Answering them means going beyond descriptive statistics by disentangling the effects of the many
factors that affect the performance of banks and the economy. Partial and general equilibrium effects
need to be disentangled. Ultimately, identification of causal effects would be useful.
This is what evaluation frameworks are about – they help us learn systematically from experience.
Both the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision have such
frameworks in place.[ ] At the European level, there are frameworks to assess the impact of EU
legislation, including the European Commission’s Better Regulation Guidelines[ ] and the Regulatory
Scrutiny Board which has, among other things, issued an opinion on EU supervisory reporting
requirements.[ ]
These frameworks help manage the costs of policy evaluations. Not every aspect of the policy debate
requires the same degree of scrutiny. Policy evaluations need to start from a discussion of the
materiality of the issue at stake and the resources that are needed for evaluations. On this basis,
evaluations can be prioritised.
Following this strategy, FSB evaluations have provided highly relevant insights into the effects of the
post crisis reforms: the too-big-to-fail reforms, the implications of higher capital requirements on
lending for small and mid-sized firms and for infrastructure finance, and the effects of reforms to
securitisation.[ ]
The results of these evaluations show that the reforms have worked as intended, without material
negative side effects on lending or growth.[ ] At the same time, they have provided insights into how
the system can be further improved.
Similarly, the Basel Committee has a dedicated evaluation programme that complements the
monitoring of the implementation of standards.[ ] This work confirms the results of the FSB’s
evaluations: implementing the Basel III reforms increased banking sector resilience and reduced
systemic risk, with no indication that the aggregate supply of credit to the economy had been impaired.
[ ]
Importantly, these evaluation frameworks explicitly invite the views of stakeholders through public
consultations, and they seek expertise from academics.
Further developing and using the existing frameworks will have significant benefits for upcoming
debates on reforms.
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Repositories and meta-analyses
Experience with evaluation frameworks shows that policy decisions need a comprehensive empirical
foundation. Single studies are not sufficient; results need to be replicated over time and across
countries.
Repositories and meta-analyses can help by pooling dispersed findings. They are routinely used in
other fields, such as medicine, where identifying the right treatment and separating intended and
unintended effects is indeed critical.[ ]
In the field of financial regulation, the Bank for International Settlements maintains a repository which
can form the nucleus for additional work. The Financial Regulation Assessment: Meta Exercise
( ) contains studies on the effects of capital and liquidity regulation as well as the too-big-to-fail
reforms.[ ]
These studies show that the impact of capital requirements needs to be assessed within the context of
the cyclical environment and banks’ starting conditions.
Banks entering a downturn in a stronger capital position tend to perform better and maintain lending
more effectively than banks starting in a weaker capital position. Weakly-capitalised banks are more
likely to restrict credit when losses materialise.[ ] At the system level, stronger banks may then use
the opportunity to gain market share and increase lending.
Over the longer term, higher capital requirements do not reduce lending.[ ] But when individual banks
are already close to their minimum requirements, have weak profitability or face high costs to raise
equity, increasing capital requirements can have a negative short-term impact on credit supply.[ ]
Conversely, reducing capital requirements does not necessarily generate additional lending. The
supporting factors that Europe has introduced as (temporary) deviations from the Basel framework are
a case in point. Their purpose is to ensure that lending to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
and infrastructure is not unduly disincentivised by bank capital regulation. These deviations indeed
lead to lower capital requirements for the affected exposures. But there is no evidence that they have
a relevant impact on lending. According to the European Banking Authority (EBA), the SME supporting
factor in particular did not stimulate lending to small companies relative to larger ones. For the
infrastructure supporting factor, the EBA found that the data are insufficiently detailed to identify
impacts on lending or risk.[ ]
These findings support the logic of building releasable buffers when economic and banking sector
conditions are favourable, which banks can then use in bad times. But the benefit of releasing buffers
during a crisis does not imply that permanent reductions in capital requirements during normal times
will stimulate credit or growth.
Overall, these studies are highly informative for the current policy debate. There is also a strong case
for further developing repositories, potentially using artificial intelligence to identify relevant studies and
extract information. I see two main areas for improvement.
The first is to add more recent studies. Much of the analytical work on the impact of capital on bank
lending was done around the great financial crisis. Adding more recent studies to FRAME would
29
FRAME
30
31
32
33
34
therefore be of great value.
The second is to broaden the perspective and add studies on other outcome variables, such as bank
performance and the cost of capital. Recent work shows that, broadly speaking, capital requirements
for banks are comparable internationally and not a relevant driver of performance.[ ] Rather, banks’
ability to compete successfully is driven by structural factors, such as the adoption of technology and
the ability to achieve scale and operating efficiency.[ ]
Moreover, better-capitalised banks tend to face lower costs of funding, regarding both debt and equity.
[ ] This shows a positive trade-off: equity capital typically carries a higher required return than debt.
But higher capitalisation also makes a bank less risky, reducing required returns. Effective and
proportionate regulation can thus lower the cost of capital, while weak and ineffective regulation tends
to raise it.[ ]
Information platforms and data centres
Without sufficient data and information as an input, evaluation frameworks remain rather empty.
There is little shortage of aggregate information about the banking sector. ECB Banking Supervision,
for example, publishes a wide range of supervisory information and data, mostly at an aggregate level
in its ECB Data Portal.[ ] In 2023 quarterly data on less significant institutions were added to those on
significant institutions. Over time, we have also added more detailed breakdowns including the cost of
risk, funding ratios, net interest margins, Stage 2 exposures, non-performing loans and liquidity
buffers. During the pandemic, we published specific information on loans subject to COVID-19-related
measures.
Data for policy evaluations, however, need to be more granular. But, traditionally, access to granular,
bank-level information has been more limited for legal reasons, in particular when it comes to
comparable datasets across countries. One way to address this limitation is to run similar empirical
studies across different datasets, thus bringing together the output, not the data. The International
Banking Research Network has successfully implemented this approach for more than a decade now.
[ ]
But access to granular banking data is now improving, following the lead taken by several national
central banks.[ ]
This year, the European Banking Authority (EBA) launched its Pillar 3 data hub, which provides access
to prudential disclosures from individual banks.[ ]
In addition, the EBA is developing an EU-wide public repository of European and national supervisory
data requests, which is expected to become operational in early 2027. The repository will increase
transparency about the data requested from banks.[ ]
Last year, the ECB started a pilot project giving external researchers access to granular, statistical,
bank-level data. Technically, access is organised via research data centres within the Eurosystem,
showing the benefits of operating a decentralised system. The pilot provides anonymised balance
sheet information for around 2,000 banks and bank-level interest rate information on loans and
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
deposits for around 300 banks for the period from 2007 to 2023. We also publish selected stress test
results at bank level.[ ]
These are positive developments. Access to granular data is provided while maintaining the
safeguards required for statistical confidentiality. But we need to do more in order to enhance
transparency and data access in a legally sound way.
In addition to data, information about relevant legislation and supervisory practices is needed. The
EBA’s Interactive Single Rulebook provides a searchable compendium linking EU banking legislation.
[ ] Moreover, we are reviewing our supervisory guidance and, as part of this, we will make our guides
more accessible and enhance the consistency of the language used.[ ]
Not least, international work can help improve the evidence base for comparing capital requirements
across jurisdictions. Recent work by the Financial Stability Institute, for example, brings together
harmonised information on capital requirements for global systemically important banks.[ ] This helps
make the capital stack more transparent and supports a more informed debate on international
comparability.
Towards strengthening the community of watchers
Banks affect everyday life. If they perform well, the payments system runs smoothly, deposits are safe,
and firms and households receive loans. But if banks are under stress and insufficiently resilient,
society bears the cost in terms of disrupted services, weaker growth, higher unemployment or even
outright fiscal costs.
We therefore need to have an informed societal debate about the effects of regulation and supervision,
based on evidence that can withstand serious scrutiny. This debate is needed to maintain resilience in
the financial system in an environment of heightened geopolitical risks and rapid structural change due
to the digitalisation of financial services.
The stakes are high. The current debate about the role banks play in promoting growth, stability and
welfare should lead to changes in regulation that can make the system stronger. But there is also a
non-negligible risk that the balance might be tilted towards the perceived short-term benefits of weaker
standards at the expense of higher long-term risks.
This is why a broad community of watchers matters: policymakers, banks, researchers, analysts,
journalists, civil society and citizens. Each group brings valuable input. Academics have a special role
to play as they bring analytical rigour.
That is how birdwatching developed. Individual observations become more valuable when they are
consistently recorded and shared among a wide audience. This can reveal patterns that no single
observer can see on their own, helping everyone learn more about how the entire ecosystem works.
As European banking supervisors, we are strongly committed to further developing a community of
watchers. We need a robust infrastructure for information sharing and rigorous impact assessments,
including evaluation frameworks, we need repositories and we need transparent access to data and
information. This is the foundation of our accountability.
44
45
46
47
1.
I would like to thank Mario Ascolese, Diana Bonfim, Konstantin Bottenberg, Agnese Leonello, Audrey
Limouzin, Cyprien Milea, Florian Narring, Laura Parisi, Mario Quagliariello, John Roche, Vítor Tomé
Rodrigues and Sebastian Scheffler for very useful input and comments on an earlier version. All
remaining errors and inaccuracies are my own.
2.
Buch, Claudia (2026), “
”, The Supervision Blog, ECB Banking Supervision, 11 September.
3.
Issing, Ottmar (1999), “ ”, speech at the ECB Watchers Conference,
Frankfurt am Main, 17 June.
4.
Buch, Claudia (2025), “ ”,
keynote speech at the ECB Banking Supervision Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 9
December; Buch, Claudia (2019), “
”, keynote prepared for the workshop “Women in Macro, Finance, and Economic
History”, Berlin, 17 June; and Buch, Claudia (2017), “
”, statement prepared for the panel discussion “Improving
Financial Resilience” at the T20 Summit “Global Solutions”, Berlin, 30 May.
5.
Article 1 of Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013 confers on the ECB specific tasks relating to the
prudential supervision of credit institutions “with a view to contributing to the safety and soundness of
credit institutions and the stability of the financial system within the Union and each Member State”.
See also recital 65 of the Regulation.
6.
Buch, Claudia (2026), “
”, remarks prepared for the “Dewatripont Fest” conference, roundtable on “Banking and
Finance”, Brussels, 6 May.
7.
Dzezulskis, Skirmantas, Libertucci, Massimo and McPhilemy, Samuel (2026), “
”, Occasional Paper Series, No 387, ECB,
April.
8.
Preparing for the unknown: lessons from the ECB’s reverse stress test on
geopolitical risk
The ECB and its watchers
Evidence-based supervision: addressing evolving risks, maintaining resilience
Policy Evaluation: Assessing the Effects of Post-Crisis Financial
Sector Reforms
Evaluating Financial Sector Reforms: A Joint
Task for Academia and Policymakers
‘The Prudential Regulation of Banks’ – Practical Implications for European
Supervision
Understanding the
banking sector capital framework in the European Union
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “
”, Basel Framework, Bank for International Settlements, paras 20.1 and 20.3.
9.
ECB (2026), .
10.
Donnery, Sharon and Quagliariello, Mario (2026), “ ”, The
Supervision Blog, ECB, 5 May.
11.
Bobeică, Gabriel and Oprică, Silviu (2026), “
”, Working Paper Series, No 3233, ECB, May; Buch,
Claudia (2025), “
”, remarks at the tenth ECB Annual Research
Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 18 September.
12.
ECB (2025), “
”, report by the Governing Council’s High-Level Task Force on Simplification, December.
13.
See footnote 6.
14.
See ECB Banking Supervision, “ ”; Article 24 of Council Regulation
(EU) No 1024/2013; and Article 263 TFEU.
15.
See ECB Banking Supervision, “ ”; Article 32 of Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013;
and Article 20(7) of Council Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013.
16.
International Monetary Fund (2025), “ ”, IMF
Country Report, No 25/203, July.
17.
See ECB Banking Supervision, “ ” and “ ”; Articles 20 and 21 of Council
Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013.
18.
European Commission (2026), .
19.
RBC20 – Calculation of minimum risk-based capital
requirements
How the Pillar 2 requirement is set
Supervising with a learning mindset
The role of judgement in supervisory scores and
additional capital requirements assigned to banks
Comments on the paper by Sumit Agarwal, Bernardo Morais, Amit Seru and Kelly
Shue entitled ‘Weighted Noise: Discretion in Regulation’
Simplification of the European prudential regulatory, supervisory and reporting
framework
Administrative Board of Review
Accountability
Euro Area Policies: Financial System Stability Assessment
Accountability Annual Report
Targeted consultation on the competitiveness of the EU banking sector
ibid. For illustrative contributions reflecting different perspectives, see European Banking Federation
(2026), , 19
April; Financial Services User Group (2026),
, 17 April; and Finance Watch (2026),
, 7 May.
20.
Issing, Otmar, op. cit.
21.
Buch, Claudia (2025), “
”, keynote speech at the BIS Innovation Summit,
10 September.
22.
See Financial Stability Board (2017),
, 3 July; and Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2022),
, Bank for International Settlements, 14
December.
23.
European Commission (2021), “ ”, Commission Staff Working Document,
3 November.
24.
See section 3.5 of the European Commission’s ; and European
Commission Regulatory Scrutiny Board (2019),
, 3 July.
25.
See Financial Stability Board, “ ”, and in particular
, March 2021;
, November
2019; , November
2018; and
, January 2025.
26.
Buch, Claudia (2025), “ ”,
keynote speech at the 2025 EBA Policy Research Workshop on “Bridging capital and growth – the role
of financial structures and intermediaries”, Paris, 19 November.
EBF response to targeted consultation on the competitiveness of the EU banking sector
Response to the targeted consultation on the
competitiveness of the EU banking sector Response to the
Commission’s targeted consultation on the competitiveness of the EU banking sector
Financial stability, supervision and regulation: building a 21st century
infrastructure for better, evidence-based policymaking
Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of the Effects of
the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms
Evaluation of the impact and efficacy of the Basel III reforms
Better Regulation Guidelines
Better Regulation Guidelines
Opinion: Fitness Check of EU supervisory reporting
requirements
Assessing the Effects of Reforms Evaluation of the
effects of too-big-to-fail reforms: Final Report Evaluation of the effects of financial
regulatory reforms on small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) financing: Final report
Evaluation of the effects of financial regulatory reforms on infrastructure finance
Evaluation of the Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms on Securitisation: Final
report
The evidence is in: resilient banks build Europe’s growth on solid ground
27.
See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “
”, Bank for International Settlements; and Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, “
”, Bank for International Settlements.
28.
See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2022), “
”, Bank for International Settlements, 14 December.
29.
See Bank for International Settlements, .
This is an online repository that tracks, organises, standardises and disseminates quantitative
evidence on the economic effects of financial regulation. See also Boissay, Frederic, Cantú, Carlos,
Claessens, Stijn and Villegas, Alan (2019), “
”, BIS Quarterly Review, pp. 53-68, 5 March. The capital and lending analysis
covers 17 studies and 37 estimates recorded in FRAME.
30.
See Bank for International Settlements,
and Cochrane, .
31.
Berger, Allen N. and Bouwman, Christa H.S. (2013), “How does capital affect bank performance during
financial crises?”, Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 109, No 1, pp. 146-176; Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli,
Detragiache, Enrica and Merrouche, Ouarda (2013), “Bank capital: Lessons from the financial crisis”,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 45, No 6, pp. 1147-1164, September; Gambacorta,
Leonardo and Mistrulli, Paolo Emilio (2004), “Does bank capital affect lending behavior?”, Journal of
Financial Intermediation, Vol. 13, No 4, pp. 436-457, October.
32.
See footnote 29.
33.
Malovaná, Simona and Ehrenbergerová, Dominika (2022), “The effect of higher capital requirements
on bank lending: the capital surplus matters”, Empirica, Vol. 49, pp. 783-832; Lang, Jan Hannes and
Menno, Dominik (2025), “The state-dependent impact of changes in bank capital requirements”,
Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 176, No 107439.
34.
European Banking Authority (2016), , 23 March;
European Banking Authority (2022), ,
Implementation and evaluation of the Basel
standards RCAP:
role, remit and methodology
Evaluation of the impact and efficacy of the
Basel III reforms
Financial Regulation Assessment: Meta Exercise (FRAME)
Impact of financial regulations: insights from an online
repository of studies
Financial Regulation Assessment: Meta Exercise – FRAME
What we do
EBA Report on SMEs and SME Supporting Factor
Report on the application of the Infrastructure Supporting Factor
3 November.
35.
Behn, Markus and Reghezza, Alessio (2025), “
”, Occasional Paper Series, No 376, ECB, Frankfurt am Main. The study finds no
overall effect of capital requirements on profit efficiency but an inverted U-shaped relationship. See
also Buchholz, Manuel, Loeffler, Axel and Sigel, Patrick (2025), “
”, Discussion Papers, No 31, Deutsche Bundesbank.
36.
Scott, Susan V., Van Reenen, John Michael and Zachariadis, Markos (2017), “
”,
Research Policy, Vol. 46, No 5, pp. 984-1004, find positive long-term effects of technology adoption on
profitability, including network effects; Beccalli, Elena, Anolli, Mario and Borello, Giuliana (2015), “
”, Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 58,
pp. 232-246, which finds some evidence for economies of scale in European banking; and Altavilla,
Carlo, Begenau, Juliane, Burlon, Lorenzo and Maruhn, Franziska (2025), “
”, Working Paper Series, No 2937, which finds
structural cost inefficiencies as a key driver of underperformance. See also Siciliani, Paolo, Eccles,
Peter, Netto, Felipe, Vitello, Elisabetta, Sivanathan, Vithushan and van Hasselt, Ivar (2023),
, Prudential Regulation Authority, 11
September; Berg, Jesper, Boivin, Nicolas and Geeroms, Hans (2025), “
”, Working Papers, Issue 04, Bruegel, 15 April; Mejino-López,
Juan and Véron, Nicolas (2025), “
”, European Parliament ECON Committee, May.
37.
Behn, Markus, Cappiello, Lorenzo and Reghezza, Alessio (2026), “Capital headroom and bank cost of
equity: Evidence from the euro area”, Economics Letters, Vol. 265, June.
38.
Bailey, Andrew (2026), “ ”, speech at Mansion House, London, 14 July.
39.
See ECB, “ ”; and ECB, “ ”. The ECB Data Portal provides access to
official ECB statistics, including data, metadata, dashboards and tools for visualisation and download.
40.
See International Banking Research Network, “ ”. See also Buch, Claudia (2022), “
”, introductory
Capital requirements: a pillar or a burden for bank
competitiveness?
Do capital requirements and their
international differences affect banks’ profitability?
The long-term effect of
digital innovation on bank performance: An empirical study of SWIFT adoption in financial services
Are
European banks too big? Evidence on economies of scale
Determinants of bank
performance: evidence from replicating portfolios
The links
between prudential regulation, competitiveness, and growth
The quickly fading memory of
why and when bank capital is important
EU banking sector and competitiveness – Framing the policy
debate
Growth and regulation
ECB Data Portal All data services
About The
International Banking Research Network (IBRN): the first decade and the way forward
remarks prepared for the 10th anniversary of the IBRN, Eltville, 6 October.
41.
See Deutsche Bundesbank’s , Banque de France’s
and Banca d’Italia’s . These institutions also
participate in the
.
42.
European Banking Authority (2026), “ ”, press release, 28 January.
43.
European Banking Authority (2026),
, Efficient reporting: simpler, smarter, proportionate; and European
Banking Authority (2026), , April.
44.
See ECB (2025), “ ”, press
release, 13 March; and ECB, “ ”. See
also ECB Banking Supervision (2025), “
”, 1 August.
45.
European Banking Authority, .
46.
ECB Banking Supervision (2026), “
”, press release, 26 June. The review covers approximately 130 supervisory guides,
reports, letters and methodologies and is intended to improve their transparency, consistency and
ease of use.
47.
See Baudino, Patrizia, Beissinger, Jonathan, Corrias, Renzo, Drehmann, Mathias, Eren, Egemen,
Erik, Burcu and Tarashev, Nikola (2026), “
”, FSI Insights on policy implementation, No 76, Bank for International
Settlements, 8 July. See also Borio, Claudio, Coelho, Rodrigo, Restoy, Fernando and Tarashev, Nikola
(2025), “ ”, FSI Briefs, No 28, Bank for International Settlements,
24 November.
Research Data and Service Centre (RDSC) Access
to granular data Granular data – Research Data Center
International Network for Exchanging Experience on Statistical Handling of Granular
Data (INEXDA)
The EBA Pillar 3 data hub goes live
Improving coordination and raising transparency and
accountability for national reporting
Overview of data requests to banks by competent authorities in 2025
ECB launches pilot project for research access to confidential statistical data
Pilot project for research access to confidential statistical data
Frequently asked questions on the 2025 stress test of euro
area banks
Interactive Single Rulebook Search
ECB streamlines supervisory guidance to improve clarity and
transparency
On the comparison of capital requirements for global
systemically important banks
Revisiting the regulatory capital stack
CONTACT
European Central Bank
Directorate General Communications
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

 +49 69 1344 7455
 media@ecb.europa.eu
Media contacts
Copyright 2026,
European Central Bank