SPEECH
Digital innovation: hindrance or booster for
banks’ business models?
Keynote speech by Claudia Buch, Chair of the Supervisory Board of
the ECB, annual Foreign Bankers’ Association of the Netherlands
conference
Amsterdam, 22 September 2026
Banking is, in essence, about processing information and making predictions[ ] – about the future
liquidity needs of depositors, the ability of borrowers to repay loans, the quality of collateral.[ ] Some of
the necessary information is measurable, while some is rather “soft” and comes from repeated
interaction with customers.
Traditionally, banks have had a key competitive advantage over other financial institutions: by
providing different financial services under one roof, they obtain valuable information to make
predictions.[ ]
Digital innovation may thus change banks’ competitive advantages – it can hinder or boost their
business models.
New technologies, in particular artificial intelligence (AI), improve the processing of information. Banks
use AI to upgrade their services, better manage risks and operate more efficiently. More than 80% of
banks supervised by the ECB identify process automation as an important way of reducing costs.[ ]
But digital innovation also accelerates structural change in the financial sector as new competitors
enter the scene and provide services along the banking value chain.[ ] Banks under ECB supervision
indeed see the potential loss of customers as one of the risks associated with the digital
transformation.[ ]
Moreover, digital innovation introduces new sources of risk. Increased competition may lead to
excessive risk taking. Cyber risk and outsourcing dependencies increase operational and financial
stability risks. AI increases the risk of fraud or of built-in biases in decision-making. It has the potential
to shake the very foundations on which banks are built – trust and dependable information systems.
Banks, supervisors and regulators must all act to ensure that digital innovation adds to, not
undermines, welfare.[ ]
Banks need long-term digitalisation strategies, built around good governance and risk management.
This includes safeguards against operational vulnerabilities and the potential misuse of AI. Digital
innovation cannot be left to the technical experts, it requires board-level attention and alignment with
core corporate values. And it requires sufficient budget to build resilient and reliable IT infrastructures.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
As supervisors, we are technology-neutral – not risk-neutral. It is not our role to determine which
technologies banks should use. But in a more digital environment, risks can emerge faster, propagate
through common infrastructures and service providers, and escape detection when viewed only on a
bank-by-bank basis. That makes overarching sectoral analysis, interaction with the relevant
stakeholders, and clear supervisory expectations even more important in strengthening resilience
across the banking industry.
Public policy needs to set guardrails beyond prudential regulation. The public sector shapes the digital
infrastructure, in particular payments and securities settlement, around which banks develop their
digital business models. The safe use of digital technologies requires frameworks that address cyber
and AI-related risks. Effective competition policy can counter concentration risks. Policy responses
need to have an international dimension – just as digital finance is international in scope.
The current debate about the competitiveness of banks can make a significant contribution to
strengthening the sector. Increasing their ability to embrace digital innovation and to safely provide
financial services in an integrated market should be at the centre of that debate.
Today, my focus is on the impact of digital innovation on the resilience of banks’ business models.[ ]
This resilience is crucial because, in a wider economic context, the future evolution of AI, uncertainty
about the sustainability of productivity gains, and the increasing proportion of debt finance mean that
safeguards are needed against increasing risks to financial stability.
How digital innovation is changing banks’ competitive advantage
Digital innovation has several dimensions.
AI makes it easier to make predictions from large sets of data. More than 90% of banks supervised
directly by the ECB already integrate AI into their operations, and 85% use generative AI, according to
supervisory data. Risk mitigation is the most important use case, with 64% of banks using AI for fraud
and cybercrime prevention. Customer support and credit scoring are other important areas.
Distributed ledger technology can improve record-keeping and enable tokenisation. Around one-third
of banks under ECB supervision report engaging in digital-asset activities, including tokenisation and
crypto-asset custody.
Quantum computing could eventually enable attackers to break some of the cryptographic methods
that banks currently rely on to protect data and transactions. Banks therefore need to prepare for a
transition to quantum-resistant cryptography. For most banks, though, quantum computing remains at
an exploratory stage.[ ]
Cloud services can give banks access to computing capacity and advanced technologies that would
be costly to reproduce internally. Around two-thirds of euro area banks have cooperation agreements
with external providers, often residing outside the European Union.[ ] This reliance on external
providers also creates dependencies – often in highly concentrated markets with limited
substitutability.[ ]
These technological innovations affect the way banks collect deposits, provide payment services and
lend to their customers. Advances in computing power and the use of mobile phones accelerate these
8
9
10
11
effects.
Digital innovation and the stability of deposit funding
Traditionally, deposits have been a relatively stable source of funding and of franchise value for banks.
[ ]
Digital innovation can reduce the stability of deposit funding. Depositors can compare deposit rates
more easily, open accounts remotely and move funds faster. Deposits may become more sensitive to
differences in pricing and risk.
Online deposit platforms are one channel through which competition increases. They allow savers to
compare deposit offers and to place deposits with the bank of their choice. The market for online
platforms is currently small, though, accounting for 1% of the deposits of households and non-financial
corporates.[ ] But for some smaller banks the share of deposits sourced through this channel can be
quite significant.
Digitalisation may change how depositors behave in periods of stress.[ ] Social media channels allow
information and rumours to spread almost instantaneously. Online banking lets depositors respond just
as quickly.[ ]
We monitor these developments and potential vulnerabilities carefully. Recent ECB research finds that
greater use of online banking can indeed amplify extreme deposit outflows to some degree. But there
is no evidence that online banking or mobile apps have made deposits more volatile in normal times.
[ ] Nor do we see a broader structural shift towards more volatile deposit flows in the euro area.[ ]
Evidence on the impact of social media is similarly nuanced: it may be important during periods of
stress, but there is so far no evidence of systematic effects on euro area deposit flows.
Digital innovation and tokenised deposits
Tokenisation is a channel through which financial innovation can affect the stability of deposits.
Tokenisation makes it possible to represent financial assets, including claims on banks, on distributed
ledgers, which means that it is much faster to create and manage assets.
A digital token has two features: it provides information about the asset, such as its type and
ownership structure, and it contains information about the rules, about what can and what cannot be
done with the asset.
Stablecoins are one form of tokenised asset. So far, the demand for stablecoins has been driven
mostly by the trading of unbacked crypto-assets like bitcoin and ether.[ ] It largely comes from
emerging markets with weak domestic currencies and high inflation, making it akin to a form of
dollarisation. Most stablecoins are indeed denominated in US dollars.[ ]
In principle, increased holdings of stablecoins could make banks’ funding sources less stable. For this
to happen, funds would not even have to leave the banking system. Under current EU rules,
stablecoin issuers must generally hold at least 30% of the relevant backing funds or reserves as
12
13
14
15
16 17
18
19
deposits with credit institutions.[ ] Greater use of stablecoins could thus shift deposits from relatively
stable retail deposits to – potentially less stable – wholesale deposits.
Yet stablecoins are unlikely to crowd out deposits as money created by banks. Savers hold deposits
because banks are protected by a public sector safety net with deposit insurance at its core. For this
reason, banks are comprehensively regulated and supervised, and they have access to central bank
money. Giving the same features to stablecoins would imply stricter regulation, supervision and
requirements for crisis management and resolution – as in the rules applying to banks. But this would
make stablecoins commercially less attractive for the issuers.[ ]
Still, banks need to develop strategic responses to financial innovation. Tokenisation of deposits is one
response – an evolutionary, not a revolutionary one.[ ] Around 30% of banks under ECB supervision
are planning the tokenisation of deposits, and around 20% plan to issue e-money tokens. Some banks
plan both. Current activities remain limited, however.
In essence, tokenisation means recording a claim against a bank – the deposit – on a distributed
ledger, i.e. a shared digital record, not only the bank’s internal record. The legal relationship between
the customer and the bank does not change.
Banks mostly use permissioned networks. In these networks, only identified and authorised
participants can join and validate transactions. Permissionless networks, in contrast, are in principle
open to anyone; most stablecoins circulate on such public permissionless networks.
Yet with permissioned networks tokenised deposits may have limited reach across banks.[ ] Some
banks have thus formed consortia to broaden the use of tokenised deposits. Whether these initiatives
have the potential to scale up depends to a large extent on how the public sector organises the
payments system infrastructure.
Digital innovation and payments systems
Deposit-taking and the provision of payment services are indeed two sides of the same coin.
Digitalisation is opening up this part of the banking value chain to greater competition.
Payment services account for around 28% of the total fee and commission income of banks.[ ]
Competition for this revenue and for the customer interface is increasing. In the first half of 2025, there
were more than 700 payment institutions and just below 300 electronic money institutions active in the
euro area.[ ] Mobile means of payment are increasingly important. In 2024, payment wallets and
other mobile apps accounted for 29% of consumers’ online payments, while by 2026 68% of euro area
companies reported accepting mobile payments.[ ] Often, banks still hold customer accounts, but
must share part of the revenue with payment service providers.
This illustrates a broader point. Digital innovation does not necessarily move financial activity away
from banks. But it can redistribute value within the financial services chain. Banks need to develop
digital strategies, with tokenisation of deposits as one element.
Public infrastructure can build bridges between banks. The ECB is thus working on two projects to
connect different private networks and preserve access to settlement in central bank money.
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
The Eurosystem’s “Pontes” initiative went live just yesterday.[ ] It allows transactions in tokenised
financial assets to be settled in central bank money. In addition to tokenised deposits, use cases
include markets for bonds, commercial paper and investment funds, repo transactions or collateral
management.[ ] Banks can thus develop tokenised services without giving up the safety and liquidity
advantages of central bank settlement.[ ]
“Appia” is a longer-term project.[ ] By 2028 it will have developed a blueprint for an integrated
European ecosystem for tokenised finance. Appia goes beyond settlement in that it will develop
common standards and interoperability – thus reducing fragmentation and allowing banks to build
scale.
Beyond building such bridges, greater harmonisation of digital laws and a common definition of
deposits are needed. Currently, for example, tokenised deposits cannot be clearly delineated from e-
money tokens.[ ] This makes it difficult for banks to scale tokenised deposit models, especially when
providing services across borders.
Moreover, tokenisation may affect banks’ risk profiles. Deposits may move faster, operational
dependencies may increase. From a supervisory perspective, these risks can largely be addressed
within the existing prudential framework.[ ] We interact closely with the industry and other authorities
to follow the rapid evolution of the market for payments services – and the associated risks.
Digital innovation and lending
Digital innovation can fundamentally change the lending process – the collection, processing and
analysis of information.
Traditionally, providing deposit services and monitoring payment flows give banks an information
advantage over other providers of credit, especially where repeated interaction allows the collection of
soft information about customers over time.[ ]
Digitalisation may shift competitive advantage. New providers of payment services and less deposit
funding may weaken banks’ information sources. This could have effects on the quantity and quality of
lending.
So far, though, negative effects of digitalisation on banks’ loan market share have been fairly
contained.
The market share of purely digital banks in the euro area has increased slightly but remains low –
below 4% in 2024.[ ] Around 80% of their funding comes from retail deposits; lending activities remain
limited.
The growth of markets for private credit is another recent phenomenon that has moved lending activity
away from banks.[ ] It is driven mainly by differences in regulation and business models rather than
by digital innovation, though, and it remains to be seen how these markets will evolve once tested
across a full credit cycle.
Perhaps the biggest impact of digital innovation could come from improvements in banks’ own lending
policies. AI-enabled credit scoring could improve the screening of loan portfolios, reduce default rates
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
and improve monitoring.[ ]
While AI can improve predictions, it cannot substitute for human judgement. Many decisions taken
within banks involve choices that cannot be reduced to statistical optimisation. How much risk to take,
how to use qualitative and soft information, how to treat unusual cases – all of this requires human
judgement. And AI can introduce new biases, requiring human intervention to align lending practices
with the values of the organisation.
The value of relationship-based information will remain high, especially in periods of stress.[ ] AI
models predict the future on the basis of information from the past. But if the recent past does not
contain relevant information about stress episodes, the information generated by AI can be of limited
value.
Managing the digital transformation of finance: the need for action
from banks, supervisors and regulators
The digital transformation of finance promises better financial services, but it also entails new risks.
Managing these trade-offs well requires action – from banks, supervisors and regulators.
Banks’ strategic responses to digital innovation
Like other industries undergoing structural change, banks are facing a fundamental shift in their costs,
technologies and competitive environment. Whether this ultimately strengthens or weakens their
business models will depend critically on their long-term strategic response.
Key elements of banks’ strategies are the quality of the information systems they rely on, the
resources invested, and the guardrails put in place.
First, new technologies cannot compensate for poor underlying data or fragmented legacy systems.
Strong risk data aggregation and reporting capabilities determine how effectively banks can exploit AI
and advanced analytics.[ ] Yet risk data aggregation remains an area where progress is often too
slow. We thus closely monitor the action banks are taking to remediate open supervisory findings, and
employ a supervisory escalation strategy if material deficiencies are not addressed in a timely manner.
[ ]
Second, digital transformation requires significant investment. Banks under ECB supervision invest on
average 2.8% of their operating income in digital transformation projects, which is around one-fifth of
total IT spending. Around 5% of their staff are allocated to digital transformation projects – and banks
have reported difficulties in attracting and retaining digital and IT specialists.[ ] From a supervisory
perspective, we expect banks to have multi-year budgets aligned with their strategic objectives and
indicators to monitor delivery.[ ]
Third, digitalisation cannot be managed as a collection of individual technology projects – good
governance and risk management remain essential. The use of AI agents brings urgency to the
question of how to establish guardrails and ensure that decisions taken are in line with core corporate
values.
36
37
38
39
40
41
There is no simple definition of good ethical behaviour – cultures, legal norms and the practical context
all play a role. What we do know, though, is what promotes ethical behaviour – good governance.
Banks remain accountable for ensuring that decisions are consistent with legal requirements, sound
risk management and the fair treatment of customers. They need to align their policies with the values
of the society to which they provide services. This cannot be outsourced to a model or to a third-party
provider.
In sum, technological capability depends on investment, data and IT architecture, just as much as on
governance and control functions. These elements reinforce each other: a bank with reliable data,
modern infrastructure and effective governance will be better placed to identify valuable applications of
new technology and to deploy them safely at scale.
Adapting supervision
As supervisors in a world of digital finance, we continue to assess whether banks are financially and
operationally resilient, and whether they have sound risk management and governance systems in
place.[ ]
But we also need to adapt. Risks can emerge faster, propagate through common infrastructures and
service providers, and become visible only when developments are viewed across banks.
This has several implications for our supervision.
First, we take a perspective beyond the individual bank. Depositors cannot assess how new
technologies create vulnerabilities and how risks can be amplified within the system. They need to rely
on supervisors monitoring and analysing vulnerabilities and addressing weaknesses.
Our system-wide view of outsourcing dependencies that the DORA framework provides is an example.
[ ] Our Guide on outsourcing and supervisory follow-up addresses risks related to the disruption of a
major cloud provider.[ ]
Second, we share information about good practices across the sector.[ ] Advances in frontier AI
models have, for example, increased the speed and scale at which cyber vulnerabilities can be
identified and exploited. This summer, we therefore asked banks to reassess their defences and
submit concrete action plans.[ ] These plans will be assessed horizontally to identify and share good
practices.
Banks also need to prepare for the transition to quantum-resistant cryptography well before the risks
fully materialise.[ ] Our role is to raise awareness, promote industry dialogue and ensure that this
longer-term risk is incorporated into banks’ strategic planning.
Third, supervision needs to ensure that banks take a sufficiently long-term perspective. In particular,
listed banks and banks depending on short-term market funding need to resist pressure to realise
short-term payouts at the expense of sound, long-term digital strategies. By analysing the soundness
of business models and medium-term capital planning, supervision can tilt the balance towards longer-
term strategic planning.
42
43
44
45
46
47
Fourth, open supervisory findings need to be remediated in a timely manner. In 2024 we conducted a
cyber resilience stress test, which confirmed that banks have response and recovery frameworks in
place. But it also identified weaknesses which need to be remediated.[ ] Moreover, cyber risk has
implications beyond supervision. Effective resolution depends critically on timely and reliable data, but
a severe cyber incident could compromise information needed to apply resolution tools.[ ]
These examples illustrate our broader approach: supervision needs to look across institutions, identify
emerging common vulnerabilities, communicate good practices and ensure that material weaknesses
are remedied before they become embedded throughout the system.
Setting regulatory guardrails
Public authorities and regulators shape the environment in which innovation can develop safely. In
payments and securities settlement, common standards, interoperability and public infrastructure
shape how competition evolves and how services are provided.
Some of the regulatory responses needed to address the risks and structural changes created by
digital innovation lie outside the prudential remit, but they will provide the basis for a healthy
ecosystem of financial service providers.
Digital innovation can significantly alter the competitive structure of banking markets. It can lead to
increased power for customers and suppliers, and it can lower barriers to entry. It can lead to market
concentration, which may require responses from competition authorities.
Structural change means that financial institutions need to be able to enter and leave the market
without creating disruptions. This requires a further strengthening of the framework for dealing with
failing financial institutions, ensuring that those with access to the public sector safety net are properly
supervised and regulated.
Systemic risks can increase, which calls for a system-wide perspective to be taken on evolving risks.
Self-regulation is not enough. This applies not only to banks, but also to other providers and
technologies that are becoming increasingly important in the financial system. Governance, sound risk
management and safeguards against systemic risk are needed wherever new financial products and
applications can have negative welfare implications. As in medicine, products that can have harmful
effects have to undergo pre-testing before being launched on the market.
Summing up
For digital innovation to boost rather than hinder banks’ business models, investment and good
governance are needed. Digital innovation requires significant upfront investment and sufficient scale.
The more fragmented markets are, the less likely are such investments to pay off. Policy measures
that contribute to more integrated banking markets in Europe – completing the banking union and
harmonising national rules that, de facto, segment markets – can thus support banks’ long-term
digitalisation strategies.[ ]
Proposals tabled by the European Commission on ways to reduce market fragmentation in Europe[ ]
can thus be a facilitator for banks’ development of sound digitalisation strategies.
48
49
50
51
Weakening prudential standards, on the other hand, would undermine precisely the operational and
financial resilience that banks need to successfully compete with new providers of financial services.
Prudential supervision has a key role to play in ensuring that banks’ governance and risk management
remain commensurate with the opportunities but also the risks that financial innovation entails.
But prudential supervision does not operate in isolation. Cyber security, AI governance, financial
integrity and market conduct interact to provide a comprehensive public policy framework.
1.
I would like to thank Nico Di Gabriele, Stephanie Czák-Ludwig, Emmanuelle Goulet, Mauritia Kroon,
and John Roche for most helpful input and comments on an earlier version. All remaining errors and
inaccuracies are my own.
2.
Diamond, Douglas W. (1984), “ ”, The Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 51, No 3, pp. 393-414; Fama, Eugene F. (1985), “
”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 15, No 1.
3.
See Kashyap, Anil K., Rajan, Raghuram G. and Stein, Jeremy C. (2002), “
”, The Journal of
Finance, Vol. 57, No 1, pp. 33-73; and McAndrews, James and Roberds, William (1999), “
”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 85,
September.
4.
ECB Banking Supervision (2023), “
”, slides, ECB, 15 February.
5.
For a comprehensive account of the impact of digitalisation on banks, see Beck, Thorsten, Cecchetti,
Stephen, Grothe, Magdalena, Kemp, Malcolm, Pelizzon, Loriana and Sanchez Serrano, Antonio
(2022), “ ”, Reports of the
Advisory Scientific Committee, No 12, European Systemic Risk Board, January. See also Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (2024), “ ”, Bank for International
Settlements, May.
6.
ECB Banking Supervision (2024), “
”, ECB, July.
7.
Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring
What’s Different About
Banks?
Banks as Liquidity
Providers: An Explanation for the Coexistence of Lending and Deposit-Taking
Payment
Intermediation and the Origins of Banking
Take-aways from the horizontal assessment of the survey on digital
transformation and the use of fintech
Will video kill the radio star? – Digitalisation and the future of banking
Digitalisation of finance
Digitalisation: key assessment criteria and collection of sound
practices
For a broader discussion of the response to AI across different stakeholders, see Financial Stability
Board (2024), “ ”, Reports to the G20, 14
November and OECD and Financial Stability Board (2024),
30 September.
8.
For a broader discussion of the macroeconomic implications of AI, see Hernández de Cos, Pablo
(2026), “ ”, speech at
the Global Fintech Fest 2026, Mumbai, 10 September.
9.
ECB Banking Supervision (2025), “ ”, slides, ECB, November;
ECB Banking Supervision (2024), “
”, ECB, July.
10.
ECB Banking Supervision (2023), “
”, slides, ECB, 15 February.
11.
See Section 1.2.4 of ECB (2026), .
12.
Koont, Naz, Santos, Tano and Zingales, Luigi (2024), “ ,” NBER
Working Paper, No 32601, June, revised August 2025; Pancaro, Cosimo, Passantino, Valerio and
Pietsch, Allegra (2025), “ ,” Financial Stability Review,
ECB, May.
13.
Based on data for 160 significant and less-significant institutions under European banking supervision
as at end-2025.
14.
Fascione, Luisa, Jacoubian, Juan Ignacio, Scheubel, Beatrice, Stracca, Livio and Wildmann, Nadya
(2025), “ ”, Working Paper Series, No 3092,
ECB, August.
15.
Cera, Katharina, Pietsch, Allegra and Sowiński, Andrzej (2023), “
”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November.
16.
The Financial Stability Implications of Artificial Intelligence
OECD – FSB Roundtable on Artificial
Intelligence (AI) in Finance: Summary of key findings,
Artificial intelligence, growth and financial stability: challenges for central banks
AI workshops with banks 2025 – Annex
Digitalisation: key assessment criteria and collection of sound
practices
Take-aways from the horizontal assessment of the survey on digital
transformation and the use of fintech
ECB Annual Report on supervisory activities 2025
Destabilizing Digital ‘Bank Walks’
The deposit franchise value of euro area banks
Mind the App: do European deposits react to digitalisation?
Financial stability considerations
arising from the digitalisation of financial services
Fascione, Luisa, Jacoubian, Juan Ignacio, Scheubel, Beatrice, Stracca, Livio and Wildmann, Nadya
(2025), “ ”, Working Paper Series, No 3092,
ECB, August.
17.
Fascione, Luisa, Oosterhek, Koen, Scheubel, Beatrice, Stracca, Livio and Wildmann, Nadya (2024),
“ ”, Occasional
Paper Series, No 361, ECB, November.
18.
European Systemic Risk Board (2025), , October.
19.
Aerts, Senne, Lambert, Claudia and Reinhold, Elisa (2025), “
”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, November.
20.
In Europe, the Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation has established harmonised EU-wide rules for
crypto-assets and stablecoins, reducing regulatory fragmentation and providing greater legal clarity for
market participants. Article 36 of the Regulation sets the minimum amount to be held in deposits at
30%, and the percentage is increased to 60% for significant stablecoins pursuant to Article 45.
21.
Hernández de Cos, Pablo (2026), “ ”, speech at a Bank of Japan
seminar, Tokyo, 20 April.
22.
Schaaf, Jürgen (2025), “ ”, The ECB Blog,
ECB, 28 July.
23.
In the non-bearer model of tokenised deposits, a deposit cannot simply be transferred from a customer
of one bank to a customer of another. Instead, the payment requires corresponding adjustments to
customer balances at the two banks and interbank settlement.
24.
European Banking Authority (2024), “ ”, Risk Assessment Report, November.
25.
See data on on the ECB Data Portal. In the first half
of 2025 the euro area recorded 724 payment institutions and 292 electronic money institutions.
26.
Mind the App: do European deposits react to digitalisation?
Keep calm, but watch the outliers: deposit flows in recent crisis episodes and beyond
Crypto-assets and decentralised finance
Stablecoins on the rise: still small in the
euro area, but spillover risks loom
Stablecoins: framing the debate
From hype to hazard: what stablecoins mean for Europe
Profitability
institutions offering payment services to non-MFIs
In 2024 payment wallets, PayPal and other mobile apps already accounted for 29% of online
payments by euro area consumers; see ECB (2024),
, December. The percentage of euro area companies accepting mobile payments
increased from 36% in 2024 to 68% in 2026; see ECB (2026), “
”, August.
27.
ECB (2026), “ ”, press release, 21
September.
28.
Cipollone, Piero (2026), “
”, keynote address at the 24th Annual Symposium on “Building the Financial System of the 21st
Century: an Agenda for Europe and the United States”, Washington DC, 15 April. In the Eurosystem’s
2024 exploratory work, market participants tested 58 different use cases. See Gaspar, Francisco and
Koczan, Gergely (2026), “
”, Financial integration and structure in the euro area, ECB, May.
29.
See the ECB’s web page; and Cipollone, Piero (2026), “
”, keynote speech at an event on “Building Europe’s integrated digital asset
ecosystem: from vision to implementation”, Brussels, 23 March.
30.
See ECB (2026),
, March; and Lagarde, Christine (2026), “ ”, opening speech at
the ECB conference on “Money in transition: digitalisation and innovation in payments”, Frankfurt am
Main, 15 June.
31.
European Banking Authority (2024), , December.
32.
Montagner, Patrick (2026), “
”, keynote speech at the 10th Annual FinTech and Regulation Conference, Brussels, 3
February. See the box entitled “ ” in the ECB Annual Report on
supervisory activities 2023.
33.
Liberti, José Maria and Petersen, Mitchell A. (2019), “ ,” The Review of
Corporate Finance Studies, Vol. 8, No 1, pp. 1-41; Kysucky, Vlado and Norden, Lars (2016), “
Study on the payment attitudes of consumers in
the euro area 2024
Use of cash by companies in the euro
area in 2026
Eurosystem brings central bank money to tokenised finance
Sparking the transformation of finance: tokenisation and the role of central
banks
The role of the Eurosystem in the scaling-up of a tokenised financial
ecosystem
Pontes Building the rails for Europe’s
tokenised financial markets
Appia – paving the way for a future-ready, integrated financial ecosystem leveraging
tokenisation and DLT Money in transition
Report on tokenised deposits
Encouraging innovation, managing risks: the ECB’s approach to digital
transformation
Developments in crypto-assets
Information: Hard and Soft
The
,” Management Science,
Vol. 62, No 1, pp. 90-110
34.
Garcia, Thomas, Grodzicki, Maciej and Radulova, Petya (2025), “
”, Financial Stability Review, ECB, May. More recent
evidence shows that digital banks adjust deposit rates faster than traditional banks, but expanded their
lending less during the recent monetary policy tightening. Budnik, Katarzyna (2026), “
”, The ECB Blog, ECB, 6 May.
35.
Matvos, Gregor, Piskorski, Tomasz, and Seru, Amit (2026), “
,” NBER Working Paper, No 34991, 2026, revised August.
36.
Li, Chunxiao, Wang, Hongchang, Jiang, Songtao and Gu, Bin (2024), “
One Million Underserved Population,” MIS Quarterly,
forthcoming/SSRN working paper version.
37.
Gambacorta, Leonardo, Sabatini, Fabiana and Schiaffi, Stefano (2025), “
”, BIS Working Paper, No 1244, Bank for International Settlements, 19 February
2025.
38.
ECB (2025), , 18 November.
39.
ECB Banking Supervision (2025), “ ”, section 5.2.3, “Risk data
aggregation and risk reporting”, November.
40.
ECB Banking Supervision (2023), “
”, slides, ECB, 15 February.
41.
ECB Banking Supervision (2024), “
”, ECB, July.
42.
European Central Bank (2025), , 18 November.
43.
Benefits of Relationship Lending in a Cross-Country Context: A Meta-Analysis
Digital banking: how new bank
business models are disrupting traditional banks
Why apps
matter: digital banks pass on monetary policy differently
Private Credit Balance Sheets and
Financial Stability
The Effect of AI-Enabled Credit
Scoring on Financial Inclusion: Evidence from
Artificial intelligence and
relationship lending
Supervisory priorities 2026-28
Aggregated results of the 2025 SREP
Take-aways from the horizontal assessment of the survey on digital
transformation and the use of fintech
Digitalisation: key assessment criteria and collection of sound
practices
Supervisory priorities 2026-28
ECB Banking Supervision (2025), “ ”, slides, ECB, 19
February. DORA:
.
44.
ECB (2025), “ ”, 16 July. ECB
(2025), , 18 November.
45.
Elderson, Frank (2026), “ ”, keynote speech at the
Goldman Sachs European Financials Conference 2026, Zurich, 3 June.
46.
Buch, Claudia (2026), “ ”, letter from the Chair of the
Supervisory Board to the chief executive officers of significant institutions, ECB, 7 July.
47.
Auer, Raphael, Dodson, Donna, Dupont, Angela, Haghihi, Maryam, Margaine, Nicolas, Marsden,
Danica, McCarthy, Sarah and Valko, Andras (2025), “
”, BIS Papers, No 158, Bank for International Settlements, July. Montagner, Patrick (2026),
“ ”, keynote
speech at the 10th Annual FinTech and Regulation Conference, Brussels, 3 February.
48.
ECB (2024), “ ”, press release, 26 July.
49.
Laboureix, Dominique (2026), “ ”,
speech at the Stockholm International Banking Crisis Management Conference, 16 June.
50.
See ECB (2025), “
”, December; and ECB (2026), “
”, April.
51.
European Commission (2026), “
”, Communication on the competitiveness of the EU banking sector, 17 July.
2024 Outsourcing Register – Horizontal analysis
Regulation (EU) 2022/2554 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14
December 2022 on digital operational resilience for the financial sector and amending Regulations
(EC) No 1060/2009, (EU) No 648/2012, (EU) No 600/2014, (EU) No 909/2014 and (EU) 2016/1011
(OJ L 333, 27.12.2022, p. 1)
ECB Guide on outsourcing cloud services to cloud service providers
Supervisory priorities 2026-28
Strengthening operational resilience for the age of AI
Addressing AI-enabled cybersecurity threats
Quantum-readiness for the financial system: a
roadmap
Encouraging innovation, managing risks: the ECB’s approach to digital transformation
ECB concludes cyber resilience stress test
Taking stock of crisis management reforms and remaining challenges
Simplification of the European prudential regulatory, supervisory and reporting
framework Eurosystem response to the EU Commission’s targeted
consultation on the competitiveness of the EU banking sector
Commission outlines measures to strengthen Europe’s banking sector
and support growth
CONTACT
European Central Bank
Directorate General Communications
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

 +49 69 1344 7455
 media@ecb.europa.eu
Media contacts
Copyright 2026,
European Central Bank