CONTRIBUTION
Bank resilience and sustainable growth: two
sides of the same coin
Contribution by Claudia Buch, Chair of the Supervisory Board of
the ECB, at the Bruegel Annual Meetings panel on “Future-proofing
European banking”
Brussels, 2 September 2026
Almost 20 years after the onset of the global financial crisis, and more than a decade after the creation
of the European banking union, there is an intense debate about the future of European banking.
Over the past decade, Europe’s banking sector has become much more resilient. This benefits the
economy and society: financial services can be provided more reliably, and the probability and severity
of potential crises are lower.
But further reforms are needed to make the European banking sector future-proof, to sustain the
progress made and to tackle structural weaknesses. In Europe, growth and innovation are being held
back by geopolitical tensions, a fragmented Single Market and a complex institutional framework.
Safeguarding banks’ resilience is equally important in light of heightened financial and operational
risks. Geopolitical risks have already materialised, but their effects on banks’ balance sheets unfold
only over time. The digitalisation of financial services provides new opportunities to adapt banks’
business models but introduces new risks. Cyber risks can pose a threat to banks’ operations,
requiring investment in IT and cybersecurity.
Resilience is thus needed – to keep deposits safe, payments systems functioning and credit flowing,
including in times of stress.
There is a way to avoid undesirable trade-offs between promoting growth and preserving resilience.
Sustainable growth and resilience are, in fact, two sides of the same coin. The European
Commission’s report on the competitiveness of the EU banking sector provides an opportunity to
advance both.[ ]
A balanced reform package needs to enhance market integration, complete the banking union and
remove undue complexities.
Enhancing market integration and completing the banking union
The main gains for growth and resilience come from further market integration.
Recent work at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) illustrates the potential gains from greater
banking market integration.[ ] Reducing barriers to cross-border banking could make it easier to form
cross-border lending relationships and ultimately deliver higher growth. Because the Single Rulebook
harmonises banking regulation, these barriers must be identified elsewhere. In fact, many differences
1
2
in national rules relevant for banks persist in the form of differences in insolvency regimes, consumer
protection rules or mortgage market regulation.[ ]
Greater harmonisation of national rules would contribute to both simplification and integration. It would
make the regulatory framework less complex and allow banks to scale up and develop pan-European
business models.
Completing the banking union would be a key accelerator for integration. Deposit insurance remains
fragmented along national borders, and risk sharing is inefficient. Less than 2% of household deposits
are held across borders.[ ] A European deposit insurance scheme would reassure savers that they
were equally protected across Europe. It would ease the cross-border provision of services and
thereby promote integration. As it wouldn’t matter which national deposit guarantee fund covered risks,
the bank-sovereign nexus would be weakened further.[ ]
Removing the barriers that prevent banking groups from moving liquidity and capital efficiently across
borders can further support a more integrated, more competitive market. This would not mean less
scrutiny by supervisors and resolution authorities. On the contrary, safeguards in periods of stress
would be retained.
Together, these reforms can promote growth through greater integration and competition, while
strengthening resilience.
Two pitfalls must be avoided as this agenda is being implemented.
The first would be a lack of political consensus to move the banking union forward and harmonise
national rules. This would be a missed opportunity to strengthen European banks in a challenging
environment. A key structural weakness – market fragmentation – would remain.
The second would be to mistake weaker capital requirements for a growth strategy. Well-capitalised
banks are needed to finance the economy and take risks. In an uncertain environment, the leverage
ratio and the output floor act as safeguards against underestimating risks. Weakening standards in the
hope of “freeing up” capital is unlikely to boost lending and growth.
At the current juncture, bank capital is not a binding constraint on credit supply. Distributions to
shareholders in the form of dividends and share buybacks have even increased in recent years, and
capital buffers remain ample. On aggregate, banks directly supervised by the ECB have a Common
Equity Tier 1 level of capitalisation of around 16%, well above minimum requirements. Weaker
standards could lead to higher shareholder payouts rather than to more lending or the investment that
banks need, for example in IT.
Lowering safeguards would make the system more fragile without addressing the structural factors
holding back growth. It could be seen as weakening Europe’s commitment to international
cooperation. Internationally agreed Basel standards provide a common baseline for bank resilience
and support a level playing field across jurisdictions. They should be implemented faithfully, in a strictly
risk and evidence-based manner.
Removing undue complexities
3
4
5
At the same time, meaningful regulatory reforms can make the institutional framework within which
banks operate less complex. Some supervisory and reporting complexities can even be removed
without changing regulations.[ ]
Generally speaking, removing undue complexities leads to a more efficient provision of financial
services, thereby supporting growth. It strengthens the focus placed on relevant risks.
We are already streamlining procedures that could divert attention away from sound risk management
and governance. We have a clear philosophy here: to be efficient, effective and risk-based in our
supervision. We do not have to assess every risk for every bank with the same intensity every year.
But if we have relevant findings, we need to ensure that banks remediate them and that we escalate
our supervisory action if necessary.
Let me give you a few examples.[ ]
6
7
We have conducted a thorough review of our supervisory guidance. Out of more than 100
guidance documents, around 40 will be discontinued because they are no longer relevant. And we
once again make it clear that our supervisory guidance communicates our expectations and good
practices, but that it is non-binding. It does not create new legal obligations beyond those laid down
in EU and national law.

Key supervisory processes have become more targeted, allowing low-risk cases to be handled
more quickly and greater attention to be devoted to higher-risk cases. Assessments of
straightforward capital transactions can now be handled through a fast-track procedure and
completed in about a week. Authorisation procedures are more risk-based. Fit-and-proper re-
assessments do not require documents to be submitted again if there have been no material
changes.

Stress tests and reporting requirements are becoming leaner. As part of the next EU-wide exercise,
which we will conduct jointly with the European Banking Authority, we have agreed to halve the
number of data points banks need to report. This complements a reduction in supervisory reporting
as part of our assessment of individual banks by around 20%.

As regards the approval of internal models, banks can opt for a new, early implementation
approach for material changes to models, subject to prudential safeguards. This allows us to direct
supervisory resources towards higher-risk areas such as models showing outlier behaviour or
subject to macro-financial vulnerabilities.

On-site investigations are becoming more risk-based, which is already reflected in more targeted
reports and a shorter average duration of missions.

The follow-up to supervisory findings is becoming more proportionate. In our supervision, we
prioritise issues that have the highest materiality and the greatest risk implications. We inform
banks about findings that are of more limited prudential relevance but leave the follow-up mainly to
their internal procedures.

These reforms make supervisory engagement more predictable and reduce unnecessary
administrative effort, with broad-based benefits:
We are not lowering our guard on resilience. Prudential standards and rigour remain unchanged. But
we will move faster when risks are contained and apply closer scrutiny when vulnerabilities are
material.
Let me be more specific about our approach to setting capital requirements and the potential for
regulatory simplification.
This year, we are applying a new, more predictable and more transparent methodology for setting
microprudential capital requirements.[ ]
In setting Pillar 2 capital requirements, we avoid the double counting of risks. The purpose of Pillar 2
capital requirements is to capture risks which are not, or not sufficiently, covered by minimum
requirements. The new methodology equips supervisors with better tools to identify and address
potential “overlaps” in risk coverage. At the same time, we maintain our ability to capture risks not
covered by minimum capital requirements and exercise supervisory judgement.
In addition, our Pillar 2 guidance addresses bank-specific exposure to future macro-financial risks.
Beyond that, there are currently several macroprudential capital buffers in the European framework
that capture risks to the stability of the overall system, not just individual banks. These buffers are set
by national authorities. Together with different methodologies that are applied, this can make the buffer
framework complex. Macroprudential requirements can therefore be simplified by regulatory changes
that consolidate capital buffers and harmonise the methods used to set them.[ ]
Summing-up
Together, improvements in supervision and in regulations ensure that banks can lend and take risks in
a sustainable manner and have strong balance sheets to absorb shocks if risks materialise.
A well-balanced reform agenda benefits society by removing inefficiencies that constrain growth,
integration and risk sharing. Europe should seize this opportunity to promote growth without sacrificing
resilience. European banking supervision stands ready to support this reform agenda, bringing our
expertise to the table and being fully accountable to the public.
This year, our focus is on increasing proportionality by more closely linking supervision and
reporting for small and non-complex institutions to their risk profiles.

banks benefit from faster decisions, clearer communication and more time to focus on managing
material risks;

supervisors benefit from freed-up capacity to address complex cases, evolving risks and serious
weaknesses in governance and risk management;

the public benefits from more effective supervision, which contributes to financial stability.
8
9
1.
European Commission (2026), “
”, Communication from the Commission, COM(2026) 615 final, 17 July.
2.
Brandão-Marques, L. et al. (2026), “
”, IMF Staff Discussion Notes, No 2026/002, International Monetary Fund, 10
June.
3.
ECB (2026),
, April.
4.
Rumpf, M. (2024), “ ”, The ECB Blog, ECB, 24
October. The share stood at 1.8% in July 2026.
5.
Buch, C. (2026), “ ”,
speech at the AFME European Financial Integration Conference 2026, Frankfurt am Main, 19 May.
6.
ECB (2025),
11 December.
7.
Donnery, S. and Amis, P. (2026), “
”, The Supervision Blog, ECB Banking Supervision, 6 July.
8.
ECB Banking Supervision (2025), “ ”, 18 November.
9.
ECB (2025), “
”, report of the Governing Council High-Level Task Force on Simplification, 11 December.
Competitiveness of the Banking Sector and the Single Market in
Banking
Deeper and More Integrated Financial Markets to Foster Growth
and Resilience in Europe
Eurosystem response to the EU Commission’s targeted consultation on the
competitiveness of the EU banking sector
Cross-border deposits: growing trust in the euro area
The bank-sovereign nexus: securing progress by completing the banking union
Simplification of the European prudential regulatory, supervisory and reporting
framework,
Streamlining supervision, safeguarding resilience: tangible progress
on our reform agenda
How the Pillar 2 requirement is set
Simplification of the European prudential regulatory, supervisory and reporting
framework
CONTACT
European Central Bank
Directorate General Communications
Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

 +49 69 1344 7455
 media@ecb.europa.eu
Media contacts
Copyright 2026,
European Central Bank